In this video, I will solve the problem
of classical crystal, or an infinite
chain of classical oscillators.
And I will determine the normal modes in
this system.
and as I mentioned, I'll do it actually
in the chain, which means it's in 1D.
And I should mention that actually I
could have done in two-dimensions or
three-dimensions.
It would have been a little bit more
complicated.
But otherwise, actually the difference,
the key features of the solution are
pretty much the same in one-dimension.
And higher dimensions, apart from some
polarization effects.
and for this reason, I will just
concentrate on the simpler case of 1D.
But, you could have done it in any
dimension.
So, the specific model I'm going to
consider is presented here. So,
we will consider one dimensional chain.
So, we should imagine that this infinite
chain, actually more specifically, I will
consider the so-called Periodic Boundary
Conditions for simplicity.
But in an infinite system, it doesn't
really matter.
And so, in this chain, as you can see,
there are two types of atoms.
Well, these guys, the brown and red
circles, they correspond, well in my
model to an atom of such 1D crystal.
And the positions of atoms will be
labelled by x_n for lighter atoms and
Y_n for heavier atoms.
And the index n here corresponds to, in
some sense, to an elementary cell.
So here, at this elementary cell would be
you know, one lighter atom and one
heavier atom.
And, let's say the size of this
elementary cell will be two times the
distance between the atoms.
And so n can be, you know, 1, 2, 3, 4, so
have an infinite series of these
elementary cells.
And also for the sake of simplicity I
will be measuring the distances in the
beginning of my solution in the units of
this elementary cell size.
So, I will essentially set 2a=1.
So, a is basically the equilibrium length
of a spring.
So, 2a is essentially represents symmetry
of my, discrete symmetry in my
problems.
So, if I translate everything by 2a, I
get my crystal.
What I'm saying here is I'm going to be
using the units where 2a is set to 1.
But basically, this is my problem.
And so, let me write down first the
energy of this system.
And so, the energy is actually very
simple to write down.
So the energy, as usual, will contain
the kinetic energy part
and the potential energy part.
And so, the kinetic energy part includes
the kinetic energy of all light atoms.
So this lower case p_n squared
over 2m.
And the kinetic energy of the heavy
atoms, so which actually have a color
code here,
The sort of brownish font corresponds to
terms that are associated with lighter
atoms, and the red font naturally
corresponds to terms which are associated
with heavy atoms.
And then, there will be potential energy,
which is just the usual Hook's Law if you
want.
But I now have Hook's Law for every
single spring in this oscillator chain.
So for example, in this nth elementary
cell, I'm going to have a term here
associated with the spring between this
lighter atom and this heavier atom, M.
And so this term essentially as is
corresponds to this this spring.
But also, there will be an interaction
let's say, of this heavy atom with the
lighter atom from the next elementary
cell, the nth+1
elementary cell.
And so there is a term also here in this
Hamiltonian, this classical Hamiltonian,
associated with this, nearest neighbor
interaction.
Now, and of course, I have to sum over
all these n's, and this will be will give
me the total energy of my classical
crystal.
Now, the next step is  to actually
solve this problem is to write down the
equations of motion for all the particles
involved.
And there's an infinite number of such
particles.
And in our case, these equations have
motion are nothing but Newton's
equations.
well, associated with each of these
particles.
And, as usual, while the Newton equation
is m times a, my mass times
acceleration is equal to the sum of all
the forces.
And the force can be found by, as a
derivative or gradient, in this case it's
just one-dimensional gradient of the
corresponding potential energy.
With the respect to the coordinate of a
particle where we're investigating.
And so, for instance for the lighter
atoms, for the nth lighter atom,
this will be the Newton law.
And for the nth heavy atom, this will be
the Newton Law.
And so, if we just formally differentiate
our potential energy, we get these
equations of motion for the lighter atoms
and the heavy atoms.
And it's very natural that, there are
two terms in each of these equations.
Because this essentially corresponds to
having two springs attached to each of
the atoms.
So, for example, here in this equation,
we can understand the first term as being
associated with the force exerted on this
heavy atom by this spring.
And the second term is going to be the
force exerted on the same atom by this
other spring to the right.
So and the goal now is to solve these
equations.
Of course, it's an infinite chain of
equations because n goes from minus
infinity to plus infinity.
So, this is an integer index which labels
our pairs of heavy and the light atoms.
So here, I'm showing the same Newton's
Law that we derived in the previous
slide, but now just slightly
reconstructed.
So, I just grouped together this 2x_n
and 2Y_n.
So, of course it's a very complicated
looking system of equations.
We actually have an infinite system of
coupled differential equations and well
naively, we would you could just say that
it's hopeless.
You know, there's no way we could solve
such a complicated model.
But it turns out that using combination
of a powerful mathematical method which
we already used actually the fourier transform
and a reasonable physical guess.
We can solve the problem in a few
relatively straight-forward steps.
So, the method involved essentially a
fourier transform where we represent our
time dependent coordinates of the light
and heavy atoms as linear combination.
Or an integral over a wave vector of a
wave like excitation.
So here, I have essentially a plain wave
in one dimension.
And so, remember that I introduced
these units of 2a = 1.
Therefore, this wave vector multiplies
just an integer label n, which labels my
coordinates of my light atoms.
And, I represent the heavy atoms as a
linear combination of their own wave is
some new amplitudes Y sub q.
And here I use q*(n+1/2)
because this guy is shifted by 1/2 in
my units of length relative
to the light atom.
And importantly, here I have the time
dependence again which is consistent with
the wave like behavior.
So, I assume essentially that whatever
solutions there are, this solution
represent waves running through this
crystal.
And now, the next step in the solution is
to plug in this trial functions into the
Newton equations.
And to see if we can make, if we can find
a self consistent solution, which is
consistent both with the Newton
equations, and with this representation.
I'm going a bit ahead myself.
I would say that, of course, the reason
I'm presenting the solution is because we
will indeed find that it's self-consistent.
But the self consistency will include in
a very essential way a relation between
Omega and q, between the frequency of the wave.
And the wave vector.
So and this is going to be
the dispersion of the waves, the possible
dispersion of the waves.
And basically, to solve the problem in
this context means to find this
dispersion basically to find Omega as a
function of q.
So now, let me consider every single
term, let's say in the first Newton
equation, corresponding to the light atoms.
So, the first term on the left-hand side
the second derivative of the coordinate
with respect to the time.
The acceleration here is going to involve
the integral over all wave vectors.
and I will just label this integral as
as integral sub q, not to write the
differentials.
and here I'm going to have x sub q.
And the derivative of the exponential
with respect to time is going to produce
minus i Omega squared exponential of iqn
minus i Omega t.
So, this is just minus Omega squared.
Now, I also have here this term of
Y_n + Y_(n+1), which essentially
corresponds here in this picture.
to having this red atom to the left and
the red atom to the right.
And so, if I now calculate this term,
Y_n+Y_(n-1), I simply can
write this expression.
So I have an integral sub q, Y sub q.
And here I have a sum of two terms, e to
the power iq n plus 1 half plus e to the
power iqn minus 1 half.
Because now this corresponds to n minus
1, e to the power minus i Omega t.
Or I can factor out this e to the bar
iqn, and here I will have e to the power iq
over 2, plus e to the power minus iq over
2.
And this is equal to the cosine,
proportional to the cosine.
So, I can write it identically as an
integral over q, Y sub q, twice cosine of
q over 2 multiplying the same exponential
as in this term here.
And if I put everything together.
So what I'm going to get is and basically
if I focus only on the coefficients,
which multiply the same plane waves in
each of these integrals, I can write
essentially the same Newton's Law.
But now, in the Fourier space as minus
m Omega squared x sub q from this guy is
equal to k twice Y sub q cosine q over 2.
This term, which we just derived minus 2x
sub q.
And this is essentially the Newton Law
corresponding to the light atoms written
in the Fourier space.
Of course, we can repeat the same kind of
procedure for the second Newton Law for
the heavy atoms.
And if we do so we are going to get the
following system of equations.
So, the first one we just derived, and
the second one I didn't explicitly
derive, but it's derived in a very
similar fashion.
So and well the good thing about these
equations first of all that instead of an
infinite chain of coupled equations.
Actually just have two coupled equations,
okay?
You see that of course, I have all
different q's involved.
So, I can change my q, but there is no
coupling between different q's.
Unlike in real space where we need to
have coupling between neighboring size n,
and another thing which is good is that
its no longer a differential equation.
Instead of the derivative, I now have just
omega squared here.
So, it's much easier now to deal with
this essentially linear 2 by 2
system of equations.
And to solve the remaining part, let me
just rewrite the same equation in a
slightly different form.
I will write it as a matrix.
Well, it's the same equation I just had
before, but now I wrote in a slightly
different way.
I wrote it as a matrix, 2x2 matrix acting
on a vector if you want, which contains
the Fourier component of the coordinates
of the light atoms and the Fourier
components of the coordinates of the
heavy atoms.
And the, the right-hand side is zero.
Because if we go back, we see that all
the terms here are proportional to one or
the other coordinate, there is no free
terms here which is just constants.
So I can write it like that and it's
equal to zero.
And maybe most of your, or some of, you
know, from linear algebra.
That in order for me to be able to have a
non-trivial solution to this equation,
which is not identically equal to zero.
Basically, a solution where x and q are
not identically equal to zero.
I have to ensure that the determinant of
this matrix, so the determinant of this
matrix vanishes.
And well this is determinant of a 2x2
matrix, which I can calculate.
And well, if you do so, you will get the
following equation, which is the
algebraic equation.
And essentially, it reduces to a
quadratic equation.
Well, it's, formally, it's an equation of
the 4th order.
But there is only Omega squared involved.
So all, all in all, it's just a quadratic
equation that I hope most of you know how
to deal with.
And well, what is this equation for?
Okay, this is again, an equation for the
frequency.
Or more precisely, for the dependence of
the frequency on the wave vector, which
is known as a dispersion relation.
Well, we have seen actually many
dispersion relations already in this
course in the context of Quantum Physics
and also classical Physics.
For instance, when we talk about the
energy of a particle, the free particle
being proportional to p squared.
So, this is essentially dispersional
relation, say of an electron or any other
free particle.
When we talk about the dispersion
relation of a photon where Omega scales
linearly with the wave vector.
This is well the dispersion relation of
electromagnetic waves.
So now, we have here an equation which
determines the dispersion relation of
elastic waves, otherwise
known as phonons.
Which can exist in this sort of simple
model of a one-dimensional crystal.
So, now before solving this equation, let
me go back to the sort of physical,
original physical units where the
dimension of length is restored.
So, here we have this q, the wave vector
which is measured in 1 over distance.
And remember that the convention
was that 2a, a being basically the size
of the length of a spring was equal to 1.
So, if we want to restore the right
physical dimension, I should multiply
this q here by 2a and also of course,
1 minus cosine squared is equal to sine
squared.
So, I can just rewrite in the usual
physical units, I can write this
term as sine squared q times a.
And now well again, this is just a
quadratic equation for Omega.
So, if I solve it I will get two branches
with a plus and minus sign.
And well, I get there actually
a rather non-linear and non-trivial relation
between omega and q.
There are two relations as a matter, two
types of excitations, two types of
waves or normal modes
that I get out of this
solution.
So, and if I plug in this dispersion
relations, so this would be my Omega of
q, and q here is defined.
I should have mentioned it before between
minus pi over a up to pi over a.
So, we'll get two terms.
There will be a branch corresponding to
plus sign, the plus branch which will look
like this.
And there will be a branch corresponding
to minus sign which will look
approximately as so. So, this is
Omega minus and this is Omega plus.
And the Omega minus is called Acoustic
Phonons, and the Omega plus is called
Optical Phonons.
So as you can see, there is a gap separating
this optical phonons from zero energy.
So, if we hit our oscillator
chain with a hammer and it's going to be
a non-linear perturbation.
We're going to excite all kinds of modes.
But if we just touch it very slightly,
very gently and apply just a weak
perturbation, there is no way we can
excite an optical phonon.
We're only going to excite these energy
excitations in the vicinity of zero
energy.
So, this is basically the energy
associated energy that we would need to
spend in order to excite in this case
acoustic modes.
And the dispersion of the acoustic modes
as q goes to zero, we'll also discuss it
in the next slide is a linear dispersion.
And this type of linear dispersion is
called sound, sound-like dispersion.
And the coefficient of proportionality,
basically Omega as a function of q, in
the q to 0 limit, for this acoustic
phonons.
And this coefficient of proportionality
is the speed of sound.
I actually forgot to mention a couple of
things here.
So in this equation, there appears this
variable mu.
So, mu here is simply the reduced mass
which, we actually have seen before, quite a
few times.
Which is, in this case, the product of
the mass of light atoms and heavy atoms
divided by their sum.
And the last thing I'm going to mention
on this slide is something about the
optical phonons.
Namely that the existence of this optical
branch is related to the fact that we
have two types of atoms
present in our crystal.
So, if we had just one type of atom,
let's say these blue atoms were the only
type of atoms.
Then, we would not have had the optical
branch and we only would've had the
acoustic branch.
Which by the way, the acoustic branch
corresponds to what I was discussing in the
end of the previous lecture to the
presence of this sort of broken symmetry
in the crystal.
So finally, let me calculate the speed of
sound, that is the coefficient of
proportionality in this dispersion of
the acoustic wave as q goes to zero.
So as we can see here so if we just focus
on the minus sign in this equation, okay?
So and if we consider the limit of q very
small, then this guy can be expanded in
Taylor series just up to first order.
So, we're just going to have qa squared
instead of the sine.
And also well, this whole thing, the
square root of 1 minus this 4 mu squared
over m M qa squared in the limit of small
q.
It can be written again using the Taylor
series if we have 1 minus epsilon.
And the epsilon is small, we can
approximately write it as 1 minus epsilon
over 2. So, in this case,
epsilon is this whole thing.
And this thing is small because we are
near the zero momentum and zero energy.
So, we can write that approximately as
1 minus 2 mu squared mM qa squared.
So, if we plug it back in here, so we're
going to see that 1 minus 1 gives us
zero, and we have just this guy in here.
So, the spectrum of the acoustic phonons
in the q to zero limit is approximately
equal to k over mu 2 mu squared and mM qa squared.
Or we can cancel these guys and we're
going to have simply recalling the
definition of the reduced mass
two times the stiffness divided by the
sum of two masses, times qa squared.
Or, if we take finally the square root of
this expression, we're going to get Omega
minus, in the q to zero limit, is
approximately equal to the square root of
2k a squared, m plus M times q.
And this is our speed of sound.
So in the next video, I'm going to redo
the problem.
Actually, in the quantum limit.
And surprisingly, we're going to
see that the solution is not more
complicated than in the classical limit.
Well, I actually find the quantum
solution actually easier than the
classical solution. But in any
case however you classify the
solution, easier or more complicated, the
solution is actually going to be quite
similar to what we found here.
And the spectrum of the quantum phonons
will turn out to be exactly equal to the
spectrum of the classical formulas.
So which is another sort of striking
manifestation of quantum to classical
correspondence, in actually a rather
complicated system.
In this case, this system models a
crystal.